Add upgrade info from the letter (#736)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/reference/cluster-upgrades/_index.md

# Cluster upgrades

> A workload cluster in a Giant Swarm installation is running a stack comprising many software components, provided by the Kubernetes project and other open source projects or software vendors, as well as by Giant Swarm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A workload cluster in a Giant Swarm installation runs a stack comprised of many software components. These components come from the Kubernetes project and other open-source projects or software vendors, as well as by Giant Swarm.
```

In order to keep all components up-to-date, to allow you to benefit from latest improvements, features and security fixes, we provide upgrades for the entire software stack in workload clusters.

> At Giant Swarm we believe that frequent, small updates are a way to keep change in the system manageable. That is why our goal is to help you to run all the clusters in the latest version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Giant Swarm we believe that frequent, small updates are the way to keep the change in the system manageable. That is why our goal is to help you to run all the clusters in the latest version.
```

> To make that possible, we invest a lot of effort in making this happen without disrupting your usage of your clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We invest a lot of effort in making this happen without disrupting your usage of your clusters.
```

> In this article, we explain how upgrades work in detail and how you should provide your workloads in order to keep them running during a workload cluster upgrade and prevent disruptions of your applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, we explain, in detail, how upgrades work and how you should prepare your workloads in order to keep them running during a workload cluster upgrade and prevent disruptions of your applications.
```

as well as many operators and controllers created and maintained by Giant Swarm.

> All of the items in the list above are released independent of each other by their vendors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of the items in the list above are released independently of each other by their vendors.
```

At Giant Swarm we bundle specific versions of these components of the workload cluster stack into a **workload cluster release**. A workload cluster release is specific for a provider (AWS, Azure, or KVM) and identified by a version number. To learn more about workload cluster releases and our versioning, check the [workload cluster releases reference](/reference/tenant-cluster-release-versions/).

Once deployed, the workload cluster stack is **immutable**.
All components are deployed based on images, either of virtual machines or of Docker containers.
No changes are ever made to components at runtime.

> This ensures that the stack running in your environment is the exact stack we have tested before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ensures that the stack running in your environment is the exact stack we tested before.
```

> As a consequence, the only way to change the stack is to perform an upgrade, to switch to a new workload cluster release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a consequence, the only way to change the stack is to perform an upgrade and to switch to a new workload cluster release.
```

### Upgrade semantics {#semantics}

According to our workload cluster release versioning, three different levels of upgrades can occur:

- *Patch upgrade*: Only the patch version number is increased.

> - *Minor upgrade*: The minor version number is increased, while the Major version number stays the same.

Reviewer: There is an inconsistency between capitalization of `minor` and `Major`

Author: done, by consistency I put it in lowercase if does not start the phrase

- *Major upgrade*: The Major version number is increased.

#### Patch upgrade {#patch-upgrade}

> Patches contain fixes only, something that needs to be done to get rid of a bug. Individual patches are as minimal as possible and they are needed to increase the stability of the cluster or fix a CVE. They are released based on upstream information and/or learnings through any of our customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Patches contain bug fixes only. Individual patches are as minimal as possible and they are needed to increase the stability of the cluster or to fix a CVE. They are released based on upstream information and/or learnings from managing clusters for customers.
```

#### Minor upgrade {#minor-upgrade}

> In case we are releasing features in a non disruptive way, feature flagged, we will put those in minor releases. Those will actually have even less impact than a patch as they will not change anything that is in place if the customer no explicitly enable them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case we are releasing features in a nondisruptive way (i.e. feature flagged) we will put those in minor releases. Those will actually have even less impact than a patch as they will not change anything that is in place if the customer doesn't explicitly enable it.
```

#### Major upgrade {#major-upgrade}

> Every few months, likely in synchronization with Kubernetes Upstream Minor Releases, we provide a new major release. It includes the new Kubernetes Minor Release, other components by third parties, and any new versions of our software that contain deeper new functionality. It means that new developments, like node pools or networking changes, are delivered within a major version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every few months, typically in synchronization with Kubernetes Upstream Minor Releases, we provide a new major release. It includes the new Kubernetes Minor Release, other components by third parties, and any new versions of our software that contain deeper new functionality. It means that new developments, like node pools or networking changes, are delivered within a major release.
```
There are inconsistencies in the capitalization of `Major` and `Minor`

> As always we provide release notes with all information needed, and especially under this new structure we are working on releasing them for Major Releases early to allow for your preparation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As always we provide release notes with all the information needed. Under this new structure, we are working to provide them for Major Releases early to allow for your preparation.
```

#### Considerations {#considerations}

Once we publish a new major release, we deprecate the oldest major release.
This means that new clusters with deprecated releases can only be created using `gsctl`.
Existing clusters, however, are not affected.

> Creating clusters with deprecated releases is generally not recommended. Testing workload cluster upgrades in a separate cluster should be the only use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating clusters with deprecated releases is not recommended. Testing workload cluster upgrades in a separate cluster should be the only use case.
```

### Upgrade automation

> **Both patch and minor upgrades** can be rolled out at any time by Giant Swarm without your interaction. Currently, we agree beforehand with the customers which time windows will suit for those upgrades in the different environments they have. We are working towards creating automation that will manage all the upgrade logic for us letting customers plan maintenance periods and policies to ensure it aligns with the company standards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Both patch and minor upgrades** can be rolled out at any time by Giant Swarm without your interaction. Currently, we agree with customers which time windows are available for upgrades in the different environments. We are working towards creating automation that will manage all the upgrade logic for us. This will be based on letting customers plan maintenance periods and policies to ensure it does not disrupt business as usual.
```

> For **new major versions** we instead inform you, but leave scheduling of the upgrade to you. This gives you the control to decide if and when it is time for you to upgrade, potentially updating workloads first. These upgrades are also accompanied or even triggered by Giant Swarm staff, to ensure we have a close eye on the upgrade process and the uptime of your workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**New major versions** are not automated. Instead, we inform you but leave the scheduling of the upgrade to you. This gives you the control to decide if and when it is time for you to upgrade, potentially updating workloads first. These upgrades are also accompanied or even triggered by Giant Swarm staff, to ensure we keep a close eye on the upgrade process and the uptime of your workloads.
```

### Skipping workload cluster release

We **don't support omitting any Major version** when upgrading from one workload cluster release to another.

Example: Going from v11.x.x directly to v13.x.x is not supported. An upgrade to v12.x.x would be required as an intermediate step.

On the Minor and Patch level, you can skip any number of workload cluster releases if desired.

Note that by default, our user interfaces upgrade to the next active workload cluster release. In order to skip a release version, you have several options, depending on the tool you use:

> - In the **web interface**, open the details page for a cluster. Click the release version of the cluster. If upgrades are available for this release, they will be listed in the dialog. Simply click the desired target version in order to enter the upgrade process. You will have an additional step for reviewing the changes before actually triggering the cluster upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the **web interface**, open the details page for a cluster. Click the release version of the cluster. If upgrades are available for this release, they will be listed in the dialog. Simply click the desired target version in order to start the upgrade process. You will have an additional step for reviewing the changes before actually triggering the cluster upgrade.
```

- As a consequence of draining, Pods running on a node will be rescheduled to other nodes.
- Once the master node is taken down and recreated, the Kubernetes API will be unavailable for a short time.

**Note**: By default, workload clusters have one master node each. [Consider using a High Availability masters setup](#checklist-ha-masters) to avoid API downtime during upgrades.

> ### Provider-specific details for AWS

Reviewer: Why not call the provider-specific session just <provider name> specific details?

Author: Good point

AWS resources are managed by the [aws-operator](https://github.com/giantswarm/aws-operator) component through a nested CloudFormation stack. For a workload cluster upgrade, the CloudFormation stacks are updated, in several steps.

> The master node re-creation is started first. Meanwhile, the recreation of worker nodes starts, where all worker nodes are recreated in batches. During the upgrade, **up to 33 percent of the worker nodes can be unavailable**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The master node re-creation is started first. Meanwhile, the recreation of worker nodes starts, where all worker nodes are recreated in batches. During the upgrade, **up to 33 percent of the worker nodes may become unavailable**.
```

### Provider-specific details for KVM

In a KVM-based cluster, our [kvm-operator](https://github.com/giantswarm/kvm-operator) builds each workload cluster node out of a Kubernetes Deployment and Pod in the control plane.

> In an upgrade, each of these deployments is updated after the according node has been drained, one after another, starting with the master node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In an upgrade, each of these deployments is updated after the applicable node has been drained, one after another, starting with the master node.
```
